Chart-Text: A Fully Automated Chart Image Descriptor
Abhijit Balaji, Thuvaarakkesh Ramanathan, Venkateshwarlu Sonathi
Images greatly help in understanding, interpreting and visualizing data. Adding textual description to images is the first and foremost principle of web accessibility. Visually impaired users using screen readers will use these textual descriptions to get better understanding of images present in digital contents. In this paper, we propose Chart-Text a novel fully automated system that creates textual description of chart images. Given a PNG image of a chart, our Chart-Text system creates a complete textual description of it. First, the system classifies the type of chart and then it detects and classifies the labels and texts in the charts. Finally, it uses specific image processing algorithms to extract relevant information from the chart images. Our proposed system achieves an accuracy of 99.72% in classifying the charts and an accuracy of 78.9% in extracting the data and creating the corresponding textual description.


Tensor Fields for Data Extraction from Chart Images: Bar Charts and Scatter Plots
Jaya Sreevalsan-Nair, Komal Dadhich, Siri Chandana Daggubati
Charts are an essential part of both graphicacy (graphical literacy), and statistical literacy. As chart understanding has become increasingly relevant in data science, automating chart analysis by processing raster images of the charts has become a significant problem. Automated chart reading involves data extraction and contextual understanding of the data from chart images. In this paper, we perform the first step of determining the computational model of chart images for data extraction for selected chart types, namely, bar charts, and scatter plots. We demonstrate the use of positive semidefinite second-order tensor fields as an effective model. We identify an appropriate tensor field as the model and propose a methodology for the use of its degenerate point extraction for data extraction from chart images. Our results show that tensor voting is effective for data extraction from bar charts and scatter plots, and histograms, as a special case of bar charts.

ChartSense: Interactive Data Extraction from Chart Images
Daekyoung Jung1 Wonjae Kim1 Hyunjoo Song1 Jeong-in Hwang1 Bongshin Lee2 Bohyoung Kim3 Jinwook Seo1 1Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA 3Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Yongin-si, Republic of Korea {rati, wjkim, hjsong, jihwang}@hcil.snu.ac.kr bongshin@microsoft.com bkim@hufs.ac.kr jseo@snu.ac.kr
Charts are commonly used to present data in digital documents such as web pages, research papers, or presentation slides. When the underlying data is not available, it is necessary to extract the data from a chart image to utilize the data for further analysis or improve the chart for more accurate perception. In this paper, we present ChartSense, an interactive chart data extraction system. ChartSense first determines the chart type of a given chart image using a deep learning based classifier, and then extracts underlying data from the chart image using semi-automatic, interactive extraction algorithms optimized for each chart type. To evaluate chart type classification accuracy, we compared ChartSense with ReVision, a system with the state-of-the-art chart type classifier. We found that ChartSense was more accurate than ReVision. In addition, to evaluate data extraction performance, we conducted a user study, comparing ChartSense with WebPlotDigitizer, one of the most effective chart data extraction tools among publicly accessible ones. Our results showed that ChartSense was better than WebPlotDigitizer in terms of task completion time, error rate, and subjective preference.

ReVision: Automated Classification, Analysis and Redesign of Chart Images
Manolis Savva∗, Nicholas Kong†, Arti Chhajta∗, Li Fei-Fei∗, Maneesh Agrawala†, Jeffrey Heer∗ ∗Stanford University
Poorly designed charts are prevalent in reports, magazines, books and on the Web. Most of these charts are only available as bitmap images; without access to the underlying data it is prohibitively difficult for viewers to create more effective vi- sual representations. In response we present ReVision, a sys-  that automatically redesigns visualizations to improve Data Table graphical perception. Given a bitmap image of a chart as in- Label % of Total put, ReVision applies computer vision and machine learning techniques to identify the chart type (e.g., pie chart, bar chart,  scatterplot, etc.). It then extracts the graphical marks and infers the underlying data. Using a corpus of images drawn from the web, ReVision achieves an image classification ac-  curacy of 96% across ten chart categories. It also accurately  extracts marks from 79% of bar charts and 62% of pie charts,  Color Palettes  and from these charts it successfully extracts the data from  71% of bar charts and 64% of pie charts. ReVision then  applies perceptually-based design principles to populate an  interactive gallery of redesigned charts. With this interface,  users can view alternative chart designs and retarget content to different visual styles.


Data Extraction of Circular-Shaped and Grid-like Chart Images
Filip Baji´c 1,*
Chart data extraction is a crucial research field in recovering information from chart images. With the recent rise in image processing and computer vision algorithms, researchers presented various approaches to tackle this problem. Nevertheless, most of them use different datasets, often not publicly available to the research community. Therefore, the main focus of this research was to create a chart data extraction algorithm for circular-shaped and grid-like chart types, which will accelerate research in this field and allow uniform result comparison. A large-scale dataset is provided containing 120,000 chart images organized into 20 categories, with corresponding ground truth for each image. Through the undertaken extensive research and to the best of our knowledge, no other author reports the chart data extraction of the sunburst diagrams, heatmaps, and waffle charts. In this research, a new, fully automatic low-level algorithm is also presented that uses a raster image as input and generates an object-oriented structure of the chart of that image. The main novelty of the proposed approach is in chart processing on binary images instead of commonly used pixel counting techniques. The experiments were performed with a synthetic dataset and with real-world chart images. The obtained results demonstrate two things: First, a low-level bottom-up approach can be shared among different chart types. Second, the proposed algorithm achieves superior results on a synthetic dataset. The achieved average data extraction accuracy on the synthetic dataset can be considered state-of-the-art within multiple error rate groups.

Line Graphics Digitization- A Step Towards Full Automation
Omar Moured1,2, Jiaming Zhang1, Alina Roitberg1, Thorsten Schwarz2, and Rainer Stiefelhagen1,2
 The digitization of documents allows for wider accessibility and reproducibility. While automatic digitization of document layout and text content has been a long-standing focus of research, this problem in regard to graphical elements, such as statistical plots, has been under-explored. In this paper, we introduce the task of fine-grained visual understanding of mathematical graphics and present the Line Graphics (LG) dataset, which includes pixel-wise annotations of 5 coarse and 10 fine-grained categories. Our dataset covers 520 images of mathematical graphics collected from 450 documents from different disciplines. Our proposed dataset can support two different computer vision tasks, i.e., semantic segmentation and object detection. To benchmark our LG dataset, we explore 7 state-of-the-art models. To foster further research on the digitization of statistical graphs, we will make the dataset, code and models publicly available to the community.

