Visualizing for the Non-Visual: Enabling the Visually Impaired to Use Visualization
J. Choi
The majority of visualizations on the web are still stored as raster images, making them inaccessible to visually impaired users. We propose a deep-neural-network-based approach that automatically recognizes key elements in a visualization, including a visualization type, graphical elements, labels, legends, and most importantly, the original data conveyed in the visualization. We leverage such extracted information to provide the reading of the extracted information to visually impaired people. Based on interviews with visually impaired users, we built a Google Chrome extension designed to work with screen reader software to automatically decode charts on a webpage using our pipeline. We compared the performance of the back-end algorithm with existing methods and evaluated the utility using qualitative feedback from visually impaired users.

SeeChart: Enabling Accessible Visualizations Through Interactive Natural Language Interface For People with Visual Impairments
MD ZUBAIR IBNE ALAM, York University, Canada SHEHNAZ ISLAM, York University, Canada ENAMUL HOQUE, York University, Canada
Web-based data visualizations have become very popular for exploring data and communicating insights. Newspapers, journals, and reports regularly publish visualizations to tell compelling stories with data. Unfortunately, most visualizations are inaccessible to readers with visual impairments. For many charts on the web, there are no accompanying alternative (alt) texts, and even if such texts exist they do not adequately describe important insights from charts. To address the problem, we first interviewed 15 blind users to understand their challenges and requirements for reading data visualizations. Based on the insights from these interviews, we developed SeeChart, an interactive tool that automatically deconstructs charts from web pages and then converts them to accessible visualizations for blind people by enabling them to hear the chart summary as well as to interact through data points using the keyboard. Our evaluation with 14 blind participants suggests the efficacy of SeeChart in understanding key insights from charts and fulfilling their information needs while reducing their required time and cognitive burden.

ChartOCR: Data Extraction from Charts Images via a Deep Hybrid Framework
Junyu Luo*1, Zekun Li 2, Jinpeng Wang3, and Chin-Yew Lin3.
Chart images are commonly used for data visualization. Automatically reading the chart values is a key step for chart content understanding. Charts have a lot of variations in style (e.g. bar chart, line chart, pie chart and etc.), which makes pure rule-based data extraction methods difficult to handle. However, it is also improper to directly apply end- to-end deep learning solutions since these methods usually deal with specific types of charts. In this paper, we propose an unified method ChartOCR to extract data from various types of charts. We show that by combing deep framework and rule-based methods, we can achieve a satisfying generalization ability and obtain accurate and semantic-rich intermediate results. Our method extracts the key points that define the chart components. By adjusting the prior rules, the framework can be applied to different chart types. Experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the- art performance with fast processing speed on two public datasets. Besides, we also introduce and evaluate on a large dataset ExcelChart400K for training deep models on chart images. The code and the dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/soap117/DeepRule

DePlot: One-shot visual language reasoning by plot-to-table translation
Fangyu Liu, Julian Martin Eisenschlos, Francesco Piccinno, Syrine Krichene, Chenxi Pang, Kenton Lee, Mandar Joshi, Wenhu Chen, Nigel Collier, Yasemin Altun
Visual language such as charts and plots is ubiquitous in the human world. Comprehending plots and charts requires strong reasoning skills. Prior state-of-the-art (SOTA) models require at least tens of thousands of training examples and their reasoning capabilities are still much limited, especially on complex human-written queries. This paper presents the first one-shot solution to visual language reasoning. We decompose the challenge of visual language reasoning into two steps: (1) plot-to-text translation, and (2) reasoning over the translated text. The key in this method is a modality conversion module, named as DePlot, which translates the image of a plot or chart to a linearized table. The output of DePlot can then be directly used to prompt a pretrained large language model (LLM), exploiting the few-shot reasoning capabilities of LLMs. To obtain DePlot, we standardize the plot-to-table task by establishing unified task formats and metrics, and train DePlot end-to-end on this task. DePlot can then be used off-the-shelf together with LLMs in a plug-and-play fashion. Compared with a SOTA model finetuned on more than >28k data points, DePlot+LLM with just one-shot prompting achieves a 24.0% improvement over finetuned SOTA on human-written queries from the task of chart QA.


MatCha: Enhancing Visual Language Pretraining with Math Reasoning and Chart Derendering
Fangyu Liu, Francesco Piccinno, Syrine Krichene, Chenxi Pang, Kenton Lee, Mandar Joshi, Yasemin Altun, Nigel Collier, Julian Martin Eisenschlos
Visual language data such as plots, charts, and infographics are ubiquitous in the human world. However, state-of-the-art vision-language models do not perform well on these data. We propose MatCha (Math reasoning and Chart derendering pretraining) to enhance visual language models' capabilities in jointly modeling charts/plots and language data. Specifically, we propose several pretraining tasks that cover plot deconstruction and numerical reasoning which are the key capabilities in visual language modeling. We perform the MatCha pretraining starting from Pix2Struct, a recently proposed image-to-text visual language model. On standard benchmarks such as PlotQA and ChartQA, the MatCha model outperforms state-of-the-art methods by as much as nearly 20%. We also examine how well MatCha pretraining transfers to domains such as screenshots, textbook diagrams, and document figures and observe overall improvement, verifying the usefulness of MatCha pretraining on broader visual language tasks.

UniChart: A Universal Vision-language Pretrained Model for Chart Comprehension and Reasoning
Ahmed Masry, Parsa Kavehzadeh, Xuan Long Do, Enamul Hoque, Shafiq Joty
Charts are very popular for analyzing data, visualizing key insights and answering complex reasoning questions about data. To facilitate chart-based data analysis using natural language, several downstream tasks have been introduced recently such as chart question answering and chart summarization. However, most of the methods that solve these tasks use pretraining on language or vision-language tasks that do not attempt to explicitly model the structure of the charts (e.g., how data is visually encoded and how chart elements are related to each other). To address this, we first build a large corpus of charts covering a wide variety of topics and visual styles. We then present UniChart, a pretrained model for chart comprehension and reasoning. UniChart encodes the relevant text, data, and visual elements of charts and then uses a chart-grounded text decoder to generate the expected output in natural language. We propose several chart-specific pretraining tasks that include: (i) low-level tasks to extract the visual elements (e.g., bars, lines) and data from charts, and (ii) high-level tasks to acquire chart understanding and reasoning skills. We find that pretraining the model on a large corpus with chart-specific low- and high-level tasks followed by finetuning on three down-streaming tasks results in state-of-the-art performance on three downstream tasks.

ChartReader- A Unified Framework for Chart Derendering and Comprehension without Heuristic RulesZhi-Qi Cheng1 Qi Dai2 Siyao Li1, 3 Jingdong Sun1
Teruko Mitamura1 Alexander G. Hauptmann1
Charts are a powerful tool for visually conveying com- plex data, but their comprehension poses a challenge due to the diverse chart types and intricate components. Ex- isting chart comprehension methods suffer from either heuristic rules or an over-reliance on OCR systems, re- sulting in suboptimal performance. To address these is- sues, we present ChartReader, a unified framework that seamlessly integrates chart derendering and comprehension tasks. Our approach includes a transformer-based chart component detection module and an extended pre-trained vision-language model for chart-to-X tasks. By learning the rules of charts automatically from annotated datasets, our approach eliminates the need for manual rule-making, re- ducing effort and enhancing accuracy. We also introduce a data variable replacement technique and extend the in- put and position embeddings of the pre-trained model for cross-task training. We evaluate ChartReader on Chart-to- Table, ChartQA, and Chart-to-Text tasks, demonstrating its superiority over existing methods. Our proposed framework can significantly reduce the manual effort involved in chart analysis, providing a step towards a universal chart under- standing model. Moreover, our approach offers opportuni- ties for plug-and-play integration with mainstream LLMs such as T5 and TaPas, extending their capability to chart comprehension tasks.


